In some of our other videos in this
course, we discuss the types of analytical
functions that are performed
within the organization.
And the various roles that
accomplish those functions.
In this video, we're going to talk
about how analytics teams in general
are situated within
the larger organization.
It turns out that how your organization
thinks about analytics can have a big
impact on not only the types
of analysis you perform.
But on the efficiencies
of those analytics,
as well as the speed at which your
skills and knowledge can evolve.
The material in this video is derived both
from our experience in advising companies
on how to develop high performing
analytical capabilities.
As well as building and
leading analytic teams of our own.
For the purposes of this discussion
we're really talking about some
combination of reporting,
ad hoc analytics and modeling functions.
And roles like database analysts,
data analysts, modelers and
data scientists, although other
roles could be included as well.
How analytic teams are structured within
an organization tends to hinge upon one
basic question.
How centralized or decentralized
should these organizations be?
Should analytics activities
be gathered under one team or
should they be embedded within many teams?
As you might imagine, the answer depends
on a number of different factors.
What we'll do here is present
four different models for
analytical organizations that speak to
different degrees of centralization.
We'll describe each model and
outline some of it's major pros and cons.
To illustrate, we'll use a visual
representation like this.
What we have here is one circle in
the center that represents functions that
are centralized.
With a ring a ring of satellites circles
that represents non-centralized teams
based on the overall organizational
structure of the business.
These might be areas like marketing or
finance,
in a functionally organized company.
Where teams align to customer groups or
lines of business if the company
is organized that way.
We use dark shading to illustrate
where analytics functions take place.
And we'll show collaboration between
the peripheral teams in the center using
dotted lines.
So, let's get started.
We'll begin with a fully centralized
model, where some set of analytical
activities are accomplished
using one centralized team.
For example, an enterprising analytics
team might serve the needs of marketing,
finance, operations, customer care, etc.
With respect to reporting,
ad hoc analysis and statistical modeling.
A centralized model has
a few key advantages.
First, we can usually achieve
a higher level of consistency when
analysis is done by a single team,
since it's
easier to ensure that common methods
are used from one analysis to the next.
It's also easier to ensure that
the priorities of the team,
including what analyses are done and
when, are aligned with the overall
needs of the enterprise versus
the needs of only one group.
Finally, analysis tens to become very
efficient in the centralized team it gets
a lot of practise.
Especially when analytics or
less contextual an more procedural.
This usually means, I get more analytical
output out of fewer resources.
However, these advantages come at a cost.
In a centralized model,
the team that executes the analysis
is usually not the same the team
that asked for the analysis.
Collaboration is required and
the requesting organization may
not get priority of other needs.
In this case, the centralized team is less
responsive to peripheral organizations and
it's harder for those organizations
to control their destinies.
A second disadvantage is around contexts,
someone who sits in marketing and who does
marketing all the time is going to have
a higher degree of marketing contexts.
Than an analyst in
the centralized organization,
who may work on a lot of different things.
Finally, while the centralized
model requires fewer people,
it does rely on some
consistency on work load.
It's harder to fill the plate
of a centralized analytical team
with non-centralized, non analytical
activities when the workload is light.
The second model called
the allocated model
seeks to improve on the responsiveness
of the analytical organization while
retaining most of the benefits
of a centralized approach.
In this model,
a sentimental analytical activity is still
accomplished using a centralized team.
But within that team specific
capacity is reserved for one or
more of the peripheral functions.
Usually, this means that the peripheral
organization gets to make
prioritization decisions
around what work is done and
when up to the limits of
their allocating capacity.
Some additional capacity is reserved in
a centralized team to handle ebbs and
flows in peripheral demand, or
to direct additional effort towards
overall enterprise priorities.
Again, the main benefit of
this approach is improved
responsiveness to the organization
requesting analysis.
It can also have the benefit of improving
the context of the analyst group,
especially when individuals
are allocated to a single function for
an extended period of time.
At the same time,
it's still possible to maintain a good
level of consistency and methods.
And the team still has some
discretion to balance efforts and
support on broader priorities.
The challenge with the allocated approach
is that it can be hard to match the level
of allocation desired with
the overall needs of the enterprise.
Inevitably, some organizations
will end up too much or
too little capacity,
where the reload perceived.
This approach also tends to require
slightly larger resource for.
Since we will move some of the flexibility
and how those resources can be deployed.
Let's say we take this
one step further and
actually distribute our analytical
resources across functional teams.
But we put structures of
processes in place to allow some
degree of coordination across those teams.
What we have in this case is
called the coordinated model.
In this model, the staffing and
priorities of the analytical resources are
completely controlled by functional teams.
However, these teams are tied together
by some set of government structures,
standard methodologies or communities like
users groups or centers of excellence.
For example, let's say we add separate
analytics teams within marketing,
finance and operations.
But those teams regularly
convened in a users group and
participated in an enterprise
level data governance program.
This would be a coordinated model.
The benefits of this approach build
on those of the allocated model.
With full control of resource priority,
functional analytics teams
can be highly responsive.
And since they are integrated
into specific functions,
a high level of context within
those functions can be achieved.
At the same time, coordination of across
teams helps to ensure that there is some
degrees of consistency in method and
approach.
However, coordination’s across teams
is notorious with difficult to achieve
it's also much more likely the work will
be duplicated across organizations or
the different group will come up
different answers to the same question.
You'll hear this described as
multiple versions of the truth,
which can be a big drain on
an organization's effectiveness.
Finally, the coordinated approach tends
to require more resources than more
centralized structures,
sends each organization's staffs to
handle its own peaks and workload.
The last organizational model we'll
discuss is the distributed model,
were analytic activities are wholly
accomplished within peripheral
organizations with little or
no coordination.
For example, the business and
consumer division of a large bank
might have completely separate analytics
teams that work in different locations and
on different problems.
The advantages of this model
are similar to the coordinated model.
Namely, a very high degree
of responsiveness and
context could be achieved.
The team also has complete flexibility
in how they accomplish analytics
since they don't necessarily need
to adhere to centralized standards.
On the downside, there's little
guarantee of consistency in methods or
even data sources.
It's much more likely the efforts
may be duplicated, and
this approach generally requires
the largest number of resources.
Since they're few mechanism to identify
overlap and streamline activities.
So which of these models is preferred?
Well, that really depends.
There are organizations that have found
success using each of these models, and
even combinations of these models.
Rather than ranking the models,
why don't we look for
some factors that tend to make each model
more or less viable in an organization?
The most significant factor that
influences our organizational model
is the size of the company.
It turns out that analytical
organizations really start
performing well when they reach
a critical mass of resources.
The specific number varies but
at least a few analysts.
Having multiple perspectives on the team
generally encourages knowledge sharing,
learning and
development of skills across team members.
More senior members can help teach more
junior members and newer members may have
new perspective that complement
a knowledge based of more tenured members.
The larger an organization is,
the easier it is to create
multiple teams with critical mass,
hence a higher likelihood that less
centralized models will work well.
It's entirely possible that you'll find
yourself as the only analyst on the team.
Does this mean you're set up for failure?
Not necessarily, it just means that you'll
need to work harder to find other people
to learn from, or you might need to
get really good at self teaching.
The second factor influencing
organizational design
is how different the analytical
methods are across the organization.
The more similar the methods, the more
to be gain from centralized model where
many different resources could be brought
together to execute the analysis.
If the methods are completely different or
require highly specialized knowledge,
something more decentralized
may work just fine.
Depending on the nature of the work,
the physical location of an organizations
functions can also have a meaningful
impact on the viability of the model.
When an organization and it's functions
are centrally located, it's much easier to
manage things like responsiveness and
collaboration with a centralized team.
When organizational groups
are geographically distributed,
especially at a global scale,
it can make more sense to embed some or
all analytical functions in those
groups via a decentralized design.
Even though telepresence technologies
make remote collaboration much easier,
differences in time zones
alone are often enough to push
organizations in this direction.
The last factor we'll discuss
is our old friend, context.
As we noted earlier, more decentralized
models tend to place analysts
closer to the business
functions they serve.
It can build a higher degree
of context in that area.
Depending on how much context and
specialization is needed,
a decentralized model might be
more effective in certain cases.
More often than not,
when companies grapple with how to setup
analytics organizations, it's usually
a battle between responsiveness and scale.
Most organizations want the efficiency
that some degree of centralization
provides, but want to retain the context
to control of more decentralized modules.
For that reason, many companies
end up in either the allocated or
coordinated structures.
Of course, this assumes the company has
actually thought through how to best
organize for analytics.
This may or may not be the case.
It's entirely possible and even probable
that an organization is failing to reach
its potential because of
an ineffective structure.
This is where you have the opportunity
to leverage what we've learned here.
As you explore your organization and
get familiar with where and how analytics
are done, you can assess what's working
well and where there might be opportunity.
And over time, you can help to influence
the way your organization evolve.
You probably won't be able
to do this on day one, but
there are some things you can do that are
consistent with the ideas we've covered.
Let's say you do find yourself as
the loan analyst in a functional team.
There's no reason why couldn't seek out
other analysts and other functions and
put together an informal
knowledge sharing group.
The point here is that you
can use the creativity and
inquisitive nature that drew you
to analytics in the first place
to help make your analytics
organization the best it can be.
Now that you understand the common
ways analytics are structured in
an organization and
what factors drive those structures,
you're well prepared to help lead your
organization in the right direction.